




Henry Jacobs – hmj32@drexel.edu 
ECON 322 – Economics Seminar
Professor Constantinos Syropoulos
The Nature of the China Trade Shocks and Its Implications on the United States Manufacturing Labor Market
(Final Draft)
February 22, 2022






Introduction
	This paper focuses on the effects that China’s recent rise as a global superpower and producer has had on the United States labor market. It will first outline some Chinese history, particularly events that have played a significant role in shaping China into the global superpower it is today. We will then pivot our attention to the United States and briefly explore various transitions the U.S. economy and labor market has undergone since World War II. In particular, we will examine the trend of falling manufacturing employment as a share of total employment in the United States, along with the nation’s transition from traditional manufacturing/production jobs towards more service-based employment during the 20th century. We will then move onto establishing the recent trade shock experienced by the United States and explore the implications that this shock has had on the United States labor market and how these findings stack up with traditional trade theory. 
	Much of the economic consensus of the late 20th century was that increased competition from foreign labor had little to do with the downward trend in U.S. manufacturing employment as a fraction of total U.S. employment. Many economists blame this error on the inability to foresee the rise of China as a global superpower in the early 2000s. Since much of China’s history in the 20th century had been filled with wars, famine, and failed soviet-inspired communist policies, it’s understandable how one could easily write off China as just another struggling nation in the global landscape. What many did not consider is the impact that a potential change in the Chinse incentive structure could have on helping China tap into perhaps the largest potential for economic growth of any other country in the world.
Chinese History -- The Emergence of China’s Planned Economy
	The People’s Republic of China (PRC) was first formed in 1949 following several years of internal conflict between two Chinese political parties, the Communist and Kuomintang, as well as several years of conflict with Japan. Mao Zedong would emerge as the new leader of China and would establish a centrally planned economy, whereby the government would largely command the allocation of inputs, the setting of prices, and production decisions. 
The planned economy under Mao was highly centralized. All production units were given quotas of outputs to be delivered to the government, and the supplies were distributed through government stores at fixed prices. Commodities that were in short supply were rationed. The management of all units—productive, political, social, and educational was in the hands of party cadres and the working class, and professionals, and intellectuals had little share in this (Ho 54). 
It's important to note that China’s decisions to fix prices and quantities of goods produced and their decision to act as an autarky played a large role in hindering innovation in the long run. The PRC’s decision to exist as an autarky cut off producers from information and feedback from the rest of the world. Since many producers didn’t have to worry about international competition and relied on steady demand from the government, there was little pressure to innovate products and processes that were already in existence (Brandt et al. 6). 
This central planning style of governance led China to restructure many of the economic foundations that had pre-existed the Mao era in pursuit of a more communist form of economy. These structural changes enacted by the PRC first had significant side-effects, including some that led to widespread death and famine. An example of a structural change that led to these negative side-effects is the second five-year plan of the PRC, “The Great Leap Forward”. Under the Great Leap Forward, the PRC would socialize the country’s agricultural sector and would undertake a massive state initiative to ramp up the country’s steel production guided by the idea that becoming one of the largest steel producers would make the country a global industrial competitor. 
Prior to the formation of the PRC, Chinese peasants farmed their land with their own tools and livestock. These people reaped the fruits of their own labor and exercised a high degree freedom in what/how much they would produce of a given good. The Chinese socialization of farming began in 1949 with the PRC creating “collective farming associations” that lumped households of individuals and their livestock/tools together to make cohesive farming units. These farming associations were initially small, consisting of up to 15 households’ worth of individuals and capital which were dubbed “mutual aid teams”. This expanded overtime to include more households until these farming associations grew to be anywhere from 100-300 households in size. In 1958, the state finally abolished private ownership of land, effectively forcing the remaining non-collective farmers to join the collective or starve (Mirsky). In 1957, Mao embarked on a mission to drastically increase the nation’s output of coal, steel, and electrical power. “By 1958, millions of people participated in the project, many of them from the countryside. Suddenly, some 600,000 steelmaking furnaces sprang up in people’s backyards everywhere, and some 11 million tons of iron and steel were produced” (Ho 58). 
The results of the Great Leap Forward were overwhelmingly disappointing and resulted in a massive famine, where an estimated 35-55 million people died. There were many reasons why this happened, but the two main reasons were that the PRC diverted so much labor away from agriculture and towards production that there was a shortage of labor and therefore a shortage of food. The second reason was that Mao had set such a high precedent for communal farming that the local jurisdictions that collected the produce felt the need to falsely report food surpluses that didn’t exist. This means that they had to rob the communal farmers of any food they had for themselves to meet these false surpluses. 
Despite these setbacks from the first rounds of state-initiatives, China did see significant economic growth and development during the time that Mao was in office. Ranging from 1950-1975, WorldBank shows that China experienced an average annual growth rate of 4.2%. China was also able to implement new technologies with aid from the soviets that led to improvements in productivity. At the same time, life expectancy grew by more than 50% and school enrollment in primary school increased by close to 100% between 1952 and 1978 (Brandt et al. 6). Despite some strong growth and development, China’s planned economy still held China far below what they were capable of, which we see when examining its history from the 1990s to today. 
Chinese History – Taking Steps to Position Themselves for Global Dominance
	Brandt et al. note that when a nation like China had spent so many years developing systems that seemed to go against natural incentive structures (like collective farming), simply reforming these incentive structures will go a long way in promoting more economic activity. The Chinese followed this approach by first shifting agriculture back to the house household cultivation model to simply realign the incentive structures that once existed.  
Household cultivation replaced collective farming... The shift to household cultivation meant that farmers could claim the fruits of extra effort for themselves, rather than receiving tiny shares of collective production... The resulting multiplication of work effort resulting from better incentives and, once output expanded, higher energy levels... raised farm labor productivity so rapidly that millions of villagers began looking for outside employment... a “big reform” affecting incentives created sufficient momentum to jump-start China’s lethargic rural economy (Brandt et al.  9). 
Brandt et al. describe how once the Chinese were able to reap the fruits of their own labor, agricultural output was able to grow at such an enormous rate that it eventually became more sensible for individuals to leave the rural economy in search of new opportunities. The overwhelming success that came from the re-privatization of the agricultural sector signaled to policymakers that embracing market-based transactions and private ownership might be the key that allows China to tap into its massive growth potential. 
	The next step that China took towards a more economically secure future was embracing the idea of a “dual price system”. Under this system, prices would be split into two primary components: plan components and market components. Under the dual price system, producers were still required to meet quotas at certain prices. Once producers met the production requirements set by the state, they were able to exchange excess supply at flexible prices. According to Brandt et al., the dual pricing system achieved two key components that the plan system failed to address, “rigid prices and neglect of innovation” (Brandt et al. 10). Now that firms were able to sell supply at fluctuating prices, they were incentivized to innovate and refine the production process so that they could maximize any potential profits to be made on the secondary market. Since the dual pricing system still required producers to meet quotas and price-ceilings, the potentially devastating political fallout that could have come with liberalized prices was not given an opportunity to gain support. The introduction of price discovery also provided more opportunities to entrepreneurs to start businesses and create new economic activity. (Brandt et al. 11). Many other benefits came to the Chinese with price discovery, but the benefits are far too numerous to list in this paper whether they are big or small. 
	Perhaps one of the most widely recognized steps that China took towards tapping into their economic potential was the creation of special economic zones (SEZs) in the 1980s. Chinese SEZs first began seeing success as ethnic Chinese entrepreneurs from Hong Kong and Taiwan brought their businesses and pre-existing industry knowledge to China to produce goods at very low costs. As the initial SEZs began to see rapid success shortly after their instantiation, more Chinese provinces and cities were eager to get in on the special tax and tariff accommodations associated with these SEZs. As this cycle really took off, China began to see the necessity for innovation in technology and engineering standards by observing their importance in the global market (Brandt et al. 13). These SEZs laid the foundation for the much larger growth that would occur as a result of China joining the WTO and being granted “most-favored nation status” in 2001, opening their economy up to a host of new trading partners and investment. Foreign Direct Investment in China as a result of increased trade has brought over many new technologies and information that has had massive spillover effects on domestic industry. 

The American Manufacturing Sector
	We now will shift our attention to the United States manufacturing sector and observe trends in both U.S. and Chinese imports and exports. We will examine a few arguments as to why these trends exist after which we will examine the effect that China’s rise in the global economy has had on the U.S. manufacturing laborer.  



Figure 1 – Manufacturing share of U.S. Employment (1939-2022). Source: FRED Economic Data (https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=Mmuq). 
According to Figure 1, the United States has seen manufacturing jobs a percentage of total nonfarm employment steadily decrease since the 1950s. This has proven to be quite perplexing to economists who have spent years attempting to justify why we might be seeing these trends. A logical reaction may be to see if the U.S. manufacturing sector has seen aggregate output fall over the same timeframe. If this were the case, then we could potentially attribute the shrinking percentage of manufacturing employment of total employment to a shrinking industry with fewer employment opportunities. The problem with this theory is that when one examines aggregate output for the manufacturing sector, they would find that U.S.  manufacturing output has seen pretty consistent growth since the 1960s. The absolute number of people employed in the manufacturing sector has stayed relatively constant over this same time period of growth in manufacturing output, pointing to the idea that labor has somehow become more productive over time.
Alan Blinder lays out three reasons as to why we might be seeing this trend, which I will quote then examine in the following paragraphs.  
[The first is] rising productivity in the manufacturing sector, which enables us to produce more and more goods with less and less labor. The second is consumer tastes, as reflected in what economists like to call “income elasticities.” It seems that people the world over prefer to spend relatively more of their income on services (e.g., restaurant meals and vacations) and [relatively] less on goods (e.g., clothing and refrigerators) as they get richer. The third is international trade. We now import a much larger share of manufactured goods than we did, say fifty years ago. All told the share of manufacturing in U.S. GDP has declined from a peak of 29.5% in 1953 to 12.7% in 2004 (Blinder 8). 
I believe Blinder’s most intuitive reason to be his first, which is that for the latter half of the 20th century, firms have been able to substitute a higher amount of capital for labor in the production process. This would be able to explain the reason as to why we see the total number of people employed in manufacturing stay relatively constant and see manufacturing output continue to grow in the United States. Capital’s ability to substitute labor in the production process also has a compounding effect whereby as time goes on, capital (technology) is made to be more efficient and becomes even more capable than it was previously of substituting labor in the production process. 
I believe what Blinder is trying to say with his second point is not entirely obvious at first but becomes clear when put into the right perspective. From the 1960s to 2000, the United States experienced an average of 2% growth, along with rapid growth in labor force participation, and steady population growth. All of these signify an economy that is expanding in magnitude. Blinder mentions in his quote that a lot of people began to consume more services as a fraction of their incomes during the latter half of the 20th century, but this doesn’t mean that the total number of manufactured goods consumed decreased. What Blinder is implying is that much of this new growth in income was spent on services and this new growth in the labor force led to more people falling into service-sector employment.  
Blinder touches on international trade as a third reason at the end of his quote as to why the U.S. manufacturing sector has not seen a large growth in employment. What he is referring to is that the United States imports, now more than ever, a larger amount of manufactured goods. This increase in manufactured imports means domestic producers face less demand. Less demand implies smaller domestic production and a reduction in demand for manufacturing labor by domestic firms. This idea has become widely accepted as a reason for the decrease in manufacturing employment as a share of total employment, as domestic workers must compete with foreign labor that can and are willing to be employed at lower prices. 
This new consensus that rising manufacturing imports have contributed to a decline in the share of manufacturing employment has not always been the case. During the 1990s, economists generally consented to the idea that trade had little to modest impact on the decline of manufacturing employment. Autor, Dorn, and Hanson outline much of the consensus around trade and wages that were widely accepted around 2000. 
Trade had not in recent decades been a major contributor to declining manufacturing employment or rising wage inequality in developed countries; 
Workers employed in regions specializing in import-competing sectors could readily relocate to other regions if displaced by trade; and
Due to the law of one price for skill, any labor-market impacts of trade would be felt by low-skilled workers generally, not by trade-exposed workers specifically. (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 207-208). 
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson in their article on the China Shock as well as Paul Krugman in an article titled, “What Economists (Including Me) Got Wrong About Globalization” cite economists’ inability to foresee China as the next major superpower in the world. China’s rise as a global superpower was not expected by many people, so it’s not surprising that many economists failed to take this into account when examining the shrinking U.S. manufacturing sector. 

Figure 2 – Change in China-US net import penetration. Source: Autor, Dorn, and Hanson – “The China Shock: Learning from Labor Market-Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade”, Page 213.
	Figure 2, which is pulled from the “The China Shock” article, shows the growth in net import penetration for specific manufacturing industries across China. Some industries experienced a growth in net import penetration of 100%, meaning that the growth in Chinese imports is more than double what was originally consumed of that same product in the domestic industry. For instance, if the growth in net import penetration in toys increased by 100%, then the amount of goods imported to the United States by China was more than double what consumers spent on the product domestically before the large rise in imports occurred. (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 213). These seismic growths in Chinese exports are spread across multiple industries, demonstrating the manufacturing prowess of China and the potential danger it poses for the U.S. manufacturing industry. The authors attribute the significant gains in import penetration to “falling prices, rising quality, and diminishing trade and tariff costs in the surging sectors” (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 218-219).
Effect of China Shock on U.S. Manufacturing Sector
	The final section of this paper will be dedicated to studying the effects that the Chinese trade shock has had on regional employment in the United States.
	
Figure 4 – The United States and China’s Current Account Balances (1985-2012). Source: World Bank (http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=world-development-indicators)      
If we examine Chinese and American current account balances during China’s formative years as a global super-trader, we will find that “China’s average current account surplus rose from 1.7% of GDP in the 1990s to 4.8% in the 2000s. In mirror-like fashion, the average US current account deficit rose from 1.6% of GDP in the 1990s to 4.4% in the 2000s” (Autor, Dorn, Hanson 214). This doesn’t necessarily imply that the Chinese are responsible for this near 1:1 relationship but does give researchers context as to what they can rule out as potential causes for these shifts. Figure 4 shows us that both of these countries have experienced two totally different trade shocks, and while we cannot specifically point to a reason from this graph, we will continue to study the effects that the negative shock has had on the United States Manufacturing sector. 
	It turns out that many manufacturing firms are clustered around similar regions across the United States. The phenomenon is referred to as clustering and was first mentioned by Alfred Marshall in his Principles of Economics. In order to study the effects of the China shock on regional labor markets, the authors break up the geographic landscape of firms into commuting zones (CZs), which the authors define as “clusters of counties that have the commuting structure of a local labor market.” (Autor, Dorn, Hanson 224). By aggregating multiple counties into one zone, the authors are able to connect multiple firms that are similar in nature but seem geographically ambiguous into a more cohesive area. The authors find that “Over the period 1990 to 2007… CZs that were more exposed to increased import competition from China experienced substantially larger reductions in manufacturing employment.” (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 224). 
	These initial results seem pretty in line with what you would expect. To loosely quote the economist Paul Krugman, much of globalization in developed nations involve importing low-skilled labor in the forms of products and exporting highly skilled resources such as engineering expertise and technical design, often for the very same product whose labor is being imported. From this, we can think of an individual who works in the U.S. manufacturing sector as directly competing with labor in the Chinese manufacturing sector. The law of one price further solidifies this, which states that under free-trade conditions, identical goods or services must sell for the same price in two different places. In this case, we can think of a U.S. laborer and Chinese laborer as offering identical services, but the main difference in this situation and like many other situations involving globalization is that often one can perform this identical service at a fraction of the cost. If we now have two “identical services”, the labor from the Chinese worker and the labor from the American worker, then any rational economic entity would choose the cheaper option given identical quantity. What we see happening with the Chinese trade shock is not a bunch of American firms moving large parts of their operations abroad to take advantage of cheap labor, but instead they decide to make larger substitutions of capital for labor and at the same time, import more of the goods that they can’t produce cheaper themselves. 
	The authors further explore this idea of regional trade shocks and find that some Commuting Zones, which are simply just geographic clusters located all around the United States, experience stronger labor shocks from the Chinese trade shock. “When looking within manufacturing, Tennessee, owing largely to its concentration of furniture producers, is far more exposed to trade with China than is Alabama, which has agglomerations of relatively heavily insulated heavy industry” (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 224). This directly ties back to the idea that firms who are similar in nature tend to cluster around the same areas, which means we can think not only of trade shocks as hitting specific industry sectors, but also can think of trade shocks affecting specific geographic regions across the United States. 
	In a way, the idea that employment shocks stemming from trade shocks and unemployment in specific regions or CZs of the United States could be potentially thought as synonymous or as moving in tandem can drastically shape the way in which policymakers react to shifting trade demographics. As trade shocks occur and certain labor sectors experience negative effects, policy makers could avoid retaliatory policies that would likely only meddle with the space of free trade. Instead, policymakers could target legislation and aid that’s focused on helping those displaced by shifting trade demographics get back into the labor force and become productive members of societies once again. If one were able to achieve some symbiosis like I have mentioned above, then the effect of government intervention would influence markets positively not by sanctioning individuals but by encouraging them to contribute once again to society. 
	The authors also found another significant implication of the China shock on U.S. employment as it relates to neoclassical economic thinking. The consensus in economics is that trade-induced shocks affect industry-sector employment on an aggregate level, but shocks should not remain local to a particular CZ. This thinking is largely based off the principle that labor is mobile – the idea that labor can readily relocate if displaced by international shocks to trade. Instead, the authors reach a different conclusion:   
That this neoclassical prediction does not appear to hold even approximately over the span of a decade suggests that the labor-market impacts of trade shocks are likely to be amplified by slow and incomplete adjustment: Rather than modestly reducing wage levels among low-skill workers nationally, these shocks catalyze significant falls in employment rates within trade-impacted local labor markets. (Autor, Dorn, Hanson 225). 
	The authors find that contrary to neoclassical theory, these shocks to the labor market do in fact materialize on a local level, where local unemployment rises and tends to stay that way for quite some time. This is easily one of the more negative drawbacks of international trade, and one can see how events like these make it easy for public consensus to quickly reach the idea that trade shocks are deeply negative and evil. I feel I am not alone in saying that so much of our future is dependent on trading freely with the rest of the world. I really do believe we are one people with many different cultures and beliefs and are all much more similar than we are not. 
Conclusion
	This paper focused on a brief history of China and outlined some factors that played an essential role in the country tapping into their economic potential. One of the key factors we discussed was the shift from communal farming back to household farming. This was partially so successful because it realigned the proper incentive structure that allows individuals to be proportionally rewarded for their efforts and ingenuity and demonstrated the success of private ownership to the PRC. Another key factor was the dual price mechanism, which allowed for the introduction of price discovery into the Chinese economy while at the same time curtailing a potential political fallout. The two final factors that played an essential role in China laying the foundation to become a world-exporting superpower were the creation of SEZs and China’s joining of the world trade organization in the 20th century. 
	The paper then discussed how U.S. manufacturing employment as a fraction of total U.S. employment has been decreasing since the 1950s, but industrial and manufacturing production in the United States has only grown rapidly since the 1960s. The main message to be driven home with this is that firms have been increasing the rate at which they substitute capital for labor in the production process. There are many reasons as to why firms may be pushed to substitute capital for labor including but not limited to: international trade markets making domestic labor unfeasible and automation increasing the efficiency of capital and reducing the dependency on human input to complete tasks. This leads to capital adding more value during the production process, reducing the dependency on workers and incentivizing investment in capital. 
	The final part of the paper discussed the China shock and the implications that it had on the U.S. labor market. We found that people employed in import competing sectors generally saw negative effects such as losing their jobs or having to accept lower wages as demand from foreign competition picked up. We also learned that firms who found themselves experiencing negative side effects from the China shock tended to be in proximity with one another. Another finding that we discovered was that the neoclassical notion that shrinkages in labor markets due to shifts in international trade will sometimes reflect themselves locally. This is opposed to the notion that shrinking industry effects will only be felt on an aggregate level and that localities shouldn’t feel shocks particularly more than another place. 





Works Cited
Izurieta, Alex, and Rob Vos. “Measuring the Impact of the Global Shocks on Trade Balances via Price and Demand Effects.” United Nations, United Nations, https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/policy/publications/wevm/monitor_note.pdf. 
Subramanian, Arvind, and Martin Kessler. Working Paper 13-6: The Hyperglobalization of Trade and Its Future. July 2013, https://www.piie.com/publications/wp/wp13-6.pdf. 
Berman, Eli, et al. Implications of Skill-Biased Technological Change: International Evidence. National Bureau of Economic Research, Sept. 1997, https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w6166/w6166.pdf. 
Autor, David H., et al. “The China Shock: Learning from Labor Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade.” NBER, 25 Jan. 2016, https://www.nber.org/papers/w21906. 
Mirsky, Jonathan. "The China We Don't Know Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine." New York Review of Books Volume 56, Number 3. February 26, 2009.
Ho, Alfred Kuo-liang. China’s Reforms and Reformers. Praeger, 2004.
China's Great Economic Transformation, edited by Loren Brandt, and Thomas G. Rawski,         Cambridge University Press, 2008. ProQuest Ebook Central, https://ebookcentral-proquest-com.ezproxy2.library.drexel.edu/lib/drexel 
